docs(adr): ATL-6599 update ADR based on first implementation experience (#952)
hyperledger/identus: docs/decisions/20240116-use-zio-failures-and-defects-effectively.md

effectively handle. Any unhandled failures should be transformed into defects and propagated through the call stack. You
should not expect callers of your component to handle lower-level failures that you do not handle.

#### Use Failure Wrappers To Prevent Failures Leakage From Lower Layers

> When invoking lower-level components, do not directly expose their failure types in your component interface. Use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not directly expose their failure types in your component interface when invoking lower-level components. Use
```

wrappers to encapsulate and abstract failure types originating from lower-level components, thus enhancing
loose coupling and safeguarding against leakage of underlying implementation details to the caller.

> Using failure wrappers and propagate them **should not be the default strategy**. Lower-level failures should primarily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using failure wrappers and propagating them **should not be the default strategy**. Lower-level failures should primarily
```

> be managed at your component implementation level ensuring that it handles and appropriately recovers them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be managed at your component implementation level ensuring that it appropriately handles and recovers them.
```

> Unhandled failures within the component's boundaries should preferably be transformed into defects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Handling failures within the component's boundaries is preferred by transforming them into defects whenever possible.
```

Author: I think your suggestion does not convey the initial message. Would something like this be better?

_"Failures not handled within the component's boundaries should preferably be transformed into defects whenever possible."_

(note: on the other hand, those that are handled should not be transformed to defects)

Reviewer: That would work - thanks for double checking

#### Adopt The “Let it Crash” Principle For ZIO Defects

Adopt the “Let it Crash” principle for ZIO defects. Let them bubble up the call stack and crash the current ZIO fiber.
They will be handled/recovered at a higher level or logged appropriately “at the end of the world” by the uppermost
layer.

## Option 2 - Practical Implementation

### Repository Layer

#### Try using defects only (`UIO` or `URIO`)

The repository layer leverages Doobie,
which [natively relies on unchecked exceptions](https://tpolecat.github.io/doobie/docs/09-Error-Handling.html#about-exceptions).
Doobie will report any database error as a subclass of `Throwable`, and its specific type will be directly

> linked to the underlying database implementation (i.e. PostgreSQL). This means there is no deterministic way to recover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linked to the underlying database implementation (i.e. PostgreSQL). Handling it this way means there is no deterministic way to recover
```

> from an SQL execution error in a database agnostic way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from an SQL execution error in a database-agnostic way.
```

A good approach is to use ZIO Defects to report repository errors, declaring all repository methods as `URIO`
or `UIO`([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/main/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/repository/ConnectionRepository.scala)).

> Conversely, declaring them as `Task` assumes that the caller (i.e. service) is able to properly handle and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversely, declaring them as `Task` assumes that the caller (i.e. service) can properly handle and
```

  override def findAll: URIO[WalletAccessContext, Seq[ConnectionRecord]] = {
    val cxnIO =
      sql"""
           | SELECT
           |   id,
           |   created_at,
           |   ...
           | FROM public.connection_records
           | ORDER BY created_at
        """.stripMargin
        .query[ConnectionRecord]
        .to[Seq]

    cxnIO
      .transactWallet(xa)
      .orDie
  }
}
```

For those cases where one has to generate a defect, a common way to do this is by using the following ZIO
construct ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/sql-doobie/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/sql/repository/JdbcConnectionRepository.scala#L212)):

```scala
class JdbcConnectionRepository(xa: Transactor[ContextAwareTask], xb: Transactor[Task]) extends ConnectionRepository {
  override def getById(recordId: UUID): URIO[WalletAccessContext, ConnectionRecord] =
    for {
      maybeRecord <- findById(recordId)
      record <- ZIO.fromOption(maybeRecord).orDieWith(_ => RuntimeException(s"Record not found: $recordId"))
    } yield record
}
```

#### Apply the `get` vs `find` pattern

> Follow the `get` and `find` best practice in the repository interface for read operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the `get` and `find` best practices in the repository interface for read operations:
```

- `getXxx()` returns the requested record or throws an unexpected exception/defect when not
  found ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/repository/ConnectionRepository.scala#L36)).

> - `findXxx()` returns an `Option` with or without the request record. This allows the caller service to handle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `findXxx()` returns an `Option` with or without the request record, which allows the caller service to handle
```

  the `found`
  and `not-found` cases and report appropriately to the end
  user ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/repository/ConnectionRepository.scala#L32)).

```scala
trait ConnectionRepository {
  def findById(recordId: UUID): URIO[WalletAccessContext, Option[ConnectionRecord]]

  def getById(recordId: UUID): URIO[WalletAccessContext, ConnectionRecord]
}
```

#### Do not return the affected row count

The `create`, `update` or `delete` repository methods should not return an `Int` indicating the number of rows affected
by the operation but either return `Unit` when successful or throw an exception/defect when the row count is not what is

> expected, like e.g. an update operation resulting in a `0` affected row

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expected, like i.e. an update operation resulting in a `0` affected row
```

count ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/sql-doobie/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/sql/repository/JdbcConnectionRepository.scala#L85)).

```scala
class JdbcConnectionRepository(xa: Transactor[ContextAwareTask], xb: Transactor[Task]) extends ConnectionRepository {
  override def create(record: ConnectionRecord): URIO[WalletAccessContext, Unit] = {
    val cxnIO =
      sql"""
           | INSERT INTO public.connection_records(
           |   id,
           |   created_at,
           |   ...
           | ) values (
           |   ${record.id},
           |   ${record.createdAt},
           |   ...
           | )
        """.stripMargin.update

    cxnIO.run
      .transactWallet(xa)
      .ensureOneAffectedRowOrDie
  }
}

extension[Int](ma: RIO[WalletAccessContext, Int]) {
  def ensureOneAffectedRowOrDie: URIO[WalletAccessContext, Unit] = ma.flatMap {
    case 1 => ZIO.unit
    case count => ZIO.fail(RuntimeException(s"Unexpected affected row count: $count"))
  }.orDie
}
```

#### Do not reflexively log errors

> The upper layer will automatically do so in an appropriate and consistent way using Tapir interceptor customisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upper layer will automatically do so appropriately and consistently using Tapir interceptor customization.
```

### Service Layer

#### Reporting `404 Not Found` to user

> How can a service appropriately report a `404 Not Found` to a user that e.g. tries to update a record

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How can a service appropriately report a `404 Not Found` to a user that i.e. tries to update a record
```

that does not exist in the database? Following the above rules, the `update` method will throw a defect that will be
caught at the upper level and return a generic `500 Internal Server Error` to the user.

For those cases where a specific error like `404` should be returned, it is up to the service to first call `find()`
before `update()` and construct a `NotFound` failure, propagated through error channel, if it gives
a `None` ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/service/ConnectionServiceImpl.scala#L149)).

> Relying on the service layer to implement it will guarantee consistent behaviour regardless of the underlying database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relying on the service layer to implement it will guarantee consistent behavior regardless of the underlying database
```

> type (could be different RDMS flavour, No-SQL, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type (could be different RDMS flavor, No-SQL, etc.).
```

```scala
class ConnectionServiceImpl() extends ConnectionService {
  override def markConnectionRequestSent(recordId: UUID):
  ZIO[WalletAccessContext, RecordIdNotFound | InvalidStateForOperation, ConnectionRecord] =
    for {
      maybeRecord <- connectionRepository.findById(recordId)
      record <- ZIO.fromOption(maybeRecord).mapError(_ => RecordIdNotFound(recordId))
      updatedRecord <- updateConnectionProtocolState(
        recordId,
        ProtocolState.ConnectionRequestPending,
        ProtocolState.ConnectionRequestSent
      )
    } yield updatedRecord
}
```

#### Do not type unexpected errors

> Defects from lower layers (typically repository) should not be wrapped in a failure, and error case class declarations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not wrap defects from lower layers (typically repository) in a failure and error case class declarations
```

like [this](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/b579fd86ab96db711425f511154e74be75583896/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/model/error/ConnectionServiceError.scala#L8)
should be prohibited.

> Also, considering that failures are expected errors from which user can potentially recover, error case class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, considering that expected failure errors from which the user can potentially recover, error case class
```

Author: The Initial meaning is also lost here. The idea is => _failures_ are considered _expected_ errors, while _defects_ are considered _unexpected_ errors.

like `UnexpectedError` should be
prohibited ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/b579fd86ab96db711425f511154e74be75583896/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/model/error/ConnectionServiceError.scala#L12)).

#### Extend the common `Failure` trait

Make sure all service errors extend the shared
trait [`io.iohk.atala.shared.models.Failure`](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/main/shared/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/shared/models/Failure.scala).
This allows handling "at the end of the world“ to be done in a consistent and in generic way.

Create an exhaustive and meaningful list of service errors and make sure the value of the `userFacingMessage` attribute

> is chosen wisely! It will be presented "as is" to the user and should not contain any sensitive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is chosen wisely! It will present "as is" to the user and should not contain any sensitive
```

data ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/model/error/ConnectionServiceError.scala#L14)).

```scala
trait Failure {
  val statusCode: StatusCode
  val userFacingMessage: String
}

sealed trait ConnectionServiceError(
                                     val statusCode: StatusCode,
                                     val userFacingMessage: String
                                   ) extends Failure

object ConnectionServiceError {
  final case class InvitationAlreadyReceived(invitationId: String)
    extends ConnectionServiceError(
      StatusCode.BadRequest,
      s"The provided invitation has already been used: invitationId=$invitationId"
    )
}
```

#### User Input Validation

> User input validation (business invariants) should primarily be enforced at the service layer and implemented using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enforcing user input validation (business invariants) should primarily sit at the service layer and implemented using the
```

[ZIO Prelude framework](https://zio.dev/zio-prelude/functional-data-types/validation).

> While it may also be partially implemented at the REST entry point level via OpenAPI specification, it is crucial to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a partial implementation at the REST entry point level via OpenAPI specification, it is crucial to
```

> enforce validation at the service level as well. This ensures consistency and reliability across all interfaces that may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enforce validation at the service level as well. This implementation ensures consistency and reliability across all interfaces that may
```

> call our services, recognising that REST may not be the sole interface interacting with our services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
call our services, recognizing that REST may not be the sole interface interacting with our services.
```

```scala
class ConnectionServiceImpl() extends ConnectionService {
  def validateInputs(
                      label: Option[String],
                      goalCode: Option[String],
                      goal: Option[String]
                    ): IO[UserInputValidationError, Unit] = {
    val validation = Validation
      .validate(
        ValidationUtils.validateLengthOptional("label", label, 0, 255),
        ValidationUtils.validateLengthOptional("goalCode", goalCode, 0, 255),
        ValidationUtils.validateLengthOptional("goal", goal, 0, 255)
      )
      .unit
    ZIO.fromEither(validation.toEither).mapError(UserInputValidationError.apply)
  }
}
```

> Validation errors should be modelled using a dedicated error case class and, when possible, provide validation failure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modeling validation errors should use a dedicated error case class and, when possible, provide validation failure
```

details. One could use a construct like the following:

```scala
sealed trait ConnectionServiceError(
                                     val statusCode: StatusCode,
                                     val userFacingMessage: String
                                   ) extends Failure

object ConnectionServiceError {
  final case class UserInputValidationError(errors: NonEmptyChunk[String])
    extends ConnectionServiceError(
      StatusCode.BadRequest,
      s"The provided input failed validation: errors=${errors.mkString("[", "], [", "]")}"
    )
}
```

#### Use Scala 3 Union Types

> Use Scala 3 union-types declaration in the effect’s error channel to clearly notify the caller of potential

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Scala 3 union-types declaration in the effect’s error channel to notify the caller of potential
```

failures ([example](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/connect/lib/core/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/connect/core/service/ConnectionServiceImpl.scala#L178))

````scala
class ConnectionServiceImpl() extends ConnectionService {

  override def receiveConnectionRequest(request: ConnectionRequest, expirationTime: Option[Duration] = None):
  ZIO[WalletAccessContext, ThreadIdNotFound | InvalidStateForOperation | InvitationExpired, ConnectionRecord] = ???

}
````

#### Do not reflexively log errors

> The upper layer will automatically do so in an appropriate and consistent way using Tapir interceptor customisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upper layer will automatically do so appropriately and consistently using Tapir interceptor customization.
```

This type ensures that the response returned to the user complies with
the [RFC-9457 Problem Details for HTTP APIs](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9457.html).

```scala
object ConnectionEndpoints {
  
  val createConnection: Endpoint[
    (ApiKeyCredentials, JwtCredentials),
    (RequestContext, CreateConnectionRequest),
    ErrorResponse,
    Connection,
    Any
  ] = ???
  
}
```

#### Use "Failure => ErrorResponse" Implicit Conversion

If all the underlying services used by a controller comply with the above rules, then the only error type that could
propagate through the effect’s error channel is the parent [`io.iohk.atala.shared.models.Failure`](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/main/shared/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/shared/models/Failure.scala) type and its conversion
to the ErrorResponse type is done automatically via [Scala implicit conversion](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/open-enterprise-agent/blob/eb898e068f768507d6979a5d9bab35ef7ad4a045/prism-agent/service/server/src/main/scala/io/iohk/atala/api/http/ErrorResponse.scala#L44).

#### Do not reflexively log errors

> The upper layer will automatically do so in an appropriate and consistent way using Tapir interceptor customisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upper layer will automatically do so appropriately and consistently using Tapir interceptor customization.
```
